 The COMET-DRIVERS

                          By EDMOND HAMILTON

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Weird Tales February 1930.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"Passing Rigel on our left, sir," reported the Canopan pilot standing
in the control room beside me.

I nodded. "We'll sight the Patrol's cruisers soon, then," I told him.
"I ordered them to mass beyond Rigel, just outside the galaxy's edge."

Together we strained our eyes into the impenetrable blackness of space
that lay before us. To the left, in that blackness, there burned the
great white sun of Rigel, like a brilliant ball of diamond fire, while
to our right and behind us there flamed at a greater distance red
Betelgeuse, and blue-white Vega, and Castor's twin golden suns, all the
galaxy's gathered suns stretching in a great mass there at our backs.
Even then, though, our cruiser was flashing out over the edge of the
galaxy's great disk-like swarm of stars, and as white Rigel dropped
behind us to the left there lay before us only the vast, uncharted
deeps of outer space.

Gazing forward into those black depths our eyes could make out, faint
and inconceivably far, the few little patches of misty light that we
knew were remote galaxies of suns like the one behind us, unthinkably
distant universes like our own. In the blackness before us, too,
there shone a single great point of crimson light, burning through
the blackness of the outer void like a great red eye. It was toward
this crimson point that I and the great-headed, bodiless Canopan pilot
beside me were gazing, somberly and silently, as our cruiser hummed on.
Then as he shifted his gaze there came from him a low exclamation, and
I turned to see that a great swarm of gleaming points had appeared in
the blackness close before us, resolving as we flashed on toward them
into a far-flung, motionless swarm of long, gleaming cruisers like our
own.

Swiftly our cruiser rushed into that hanging swarm of ships, which made
way quickly before us as there flashed from our bows the signal that
marked my cruiser as that of the Chief of the Interstellar Patrol.
Then as we too slowed and hung motionless at the head of the swarm
I saw three cruisers among them flashing toward us, slanting up and
hovering just beneath our craft. There came the sharp rattle of metal
as their space-gangways rose up and connected with our cruiser, and
then the clang of our space-doors opening. A moment more and the door
of the control room was snapped suddenly aside and three strange and
dissimilar figures stepped inside, coming swiftly to attention and
saluting me.

"Gor Han! Jurt Tul! Najus Nar!" I greeted them. "You've massed a
thousand of the Patrol's cruisers here as I ordered?"

Gor Han bowed in the affirmative. A great Betelgeusan, his big
fur-covered shape was typical of the races of that big sun's cold
world: a huge barrel-like torso supported by four thick stocky limbs,
with four similar upper arms; his dark eyes and other features being
set directly into the upper part of that furry torso, which was
headless. Jurt Tul, beside him, was as strange a figure, patently of
the amphibious peoples of Aldebaran's watery worlds, his great green
bulk of shapeless body and powerful flipper-limbs almost hiding the
small bulbous head with its round and lidless eyes. And Najus Nar, who
completed the strange trio, was as dissimilar from them as from myself.
One of the powerful insect-men of Procyon, his flat, upright body, as
tall almost as my own, was dark and hard and shiny in back and of soft
white flesh in front, with a half-dozen pairs of short limbs branching
from it from bottom to top, and with a blank, faceless head from the
sides of which projected the short, flexible stalks that held in their
ends his four keen eyes. Strange enough were these three Sub-Chiefs of
the great Patrol, yet to me these three lieutenants of mine were so
familiar, in appearance, that as they faced me now their strange and
dissimilar forms made no impression on my mind.

"Your order was urgent, sir," Gor Han was saying, "that we mass a
thousand of the Patrol's cruisers here outside the galaxy's edge, and
await your coming."

"Urgent, yes," I repeated somberly, my eyes turning from them to the
great point of crimson light that shone in the black depths beyond;
"urgent because it is out from the galaxy's edge that we are going with
these cruisers, toward that point of red light there in the void that
has puzzled all the galaxy since its appearance days ago--out toward
that point of crimson light which our astronomers now have discovered
to be a gigantic comet that is racing at speed incredible straight
toward our galaxy from the depths of outer space!"

The three gazed at me, stunned, silent, and in that moment the only
sound in the control room was the low humming of the generators
beneath, which sustained our ship in space. Then, gazing out again into
the black depths ahead toward that blood-like point, I was speaking on.

"Comets there are in our galaxy, as you know, comets that revolve
in irregular orbits about various of our stars, and which have been
familiar to us always. A comet, as you know, consists of the coma or
head, the nucleus, and the tail. The coma is simply a great globe of
electrical energy, with a hollow space at its center. The nucleus is
all the comet's solid matter, a mass of meteoric and other material
hanging in the hollow at the coma's center. The great coma blows from
its own electrical energy, and is driven through space by the release
of some of that energy backward, through the vast tail, which is
simply released energy from the coma. It is the great coma that makes
a comet deadly to approach, since any matter that enters its terrific
sea of electrical energy is converted instantly into electrical energy
likewise, changed from matter-vibrations to electrical-vibrations,
annihilated. Our interstellar navigators have for that reason always
avoided the comets of our galaxy, while never has it been dreamed that
a comet might exist in empty space outside our galaxy.

"Now, however, our astronomers have found that this crimson spot of
light that has appeared in the outer void and has puzzled us for days
is in reality a giant crimson comet of size and speed unthinkable,
which is racing straight toward our galaxy and will reach it within
a few more weeks. _And when it does reach it, it means the galaxy's
doom!_ For this gigantic comet, greater by far than any of the galaxy's
greatest suns, will crash through the galaxy's swarm of stars like a
meteor through a swarm of fireflies, annihilating those in its path by
absorbing them and their worlds into the terrific electrical energy of
its mighty coma; disrupting all the finely balanced celestial mechanism
of our universe and sucking its whirling stars into its deadly
self as it smashes on; engulfing our suns and worlds in electrical
annihilation, and then racing on into the void, leaving behind it but
the drifting fragments of our wrecked and riven universe!

"Onward toward our universe this mighty comet is thundering, and but
one chance remains for us to turn it aside. The center of this comet,
of any comet, is the nucleus at the heart of its coma, which is the
only solid matter in it. If we could penetrate through the coma to
the great hollow inside it, could turn upon that nucleus the powerful
force-beams used by our Patrol cruisers to sweep up meteor-swarms, we
could possibly push it aside enough to change its course, to send it
past our galaxy's edge instead of through it. But that must be done
soon! Our astronomers have calculated that within twelve more days the
comet will have reached a point so near the galaxy that it will be
too late for anything ever to turn it aside. When the Council of Suns
informed me of this I flashed word immediately for you three Sub-Chiefs
to mass swiftly a thousand of the Patrol's cruisers here outside the
galaxy's edge. And with these thousand ships we are starting at once
toward the comet!

"Behind us the Patrol will be massing another five thousand cruisers to
send out after us, but these can hardly reach the comet before it is
too late. It is on us, and on our thousand cruisers, that the galaxy's
fate now hangs. If we can reach the great oncoming comet, can penetrate
through its deadly coma to the solid nucleus at its center, can deflect
that nucleus with our force-beams before the twelfth day ends, we will
have turned the great comet aside, will have saved the galaxy itself
from death. If we can not, the galaxy perishes and we perish with it.
For we of the Interstellar Patrol, who have defended and guarded the
ways of that galaxy for thousands upon tens of thousands of years, go
out to the oncoming comet now not to return unless we can turn that
comet aside and save our universe from doom!"

Again in the control room was silence when I had finished, a silence
that seemed intensified, as the three strange Sub-Chiefs before me held
my eyes. Then, without speaking, they calmly saluted once more, eyes
alight. Impulsively I reached hands out toward them, grasped their own.
Then they had turned, were striding swiftly out of the control room and
through the passages beyond down to the space-doors, and through the
closed space-gangways to their own three cruisers. As our space-doors
clanged shut once more, the gangways of those cruisers folded down upon
them, and then the three craft had smoothly moved back to take up a
position just behind my own.

I turned to the round opening of the speech-instrument beside me,
spoke a brief order into it, and in answer to that order the thousand
cruisers behind us smoothly and quickly massed into space-squadron
formation, a long slender wedge with my own cruiser at the apex and
those of the three Sub-Chiefs just behind me. Another brief order and
the Canopan pilot beside me was opening the controls, our cruiser
and the great triangle of massed cruisers behind us moving smoothly
forward toward the crimson-gleaming point in the blackness ahead, our
generators throbbing louder and louder as we slipped forward at swiftly
mounting speed. We were on our way toward the great comet, and our
struggle for the life of our universe had begun!

       *       *       *       *       *

The voice of Gor Han came clearly from the speech-instrument as I
stepped into the control room, days later. "Comet dead ahead, sir," he
announced.

But my own eyes were already on the scene ahead. "Yes," I told him,
"another hour will bring us to the coma's edge."

For before us now, bulking crimson and mighty and monstrous in the
heavens ahead, glowed the giant comet toward which for the last nine
days our thousand ships had been flashing. On and on we had rushed
toward it at unnumbered light-speeds, through the vast ether-currents
that raged here in space outside the galaxy, past regions of strange
and deadly force which we but glimpsed and which we gave a wide berth,
on into the endless outer void until our galaxy had shrunk to a small
swarm of blinking light-points in the darkness behind us. Almost,
in those days, we had forgotten the existence of that galaxy, so
centered was our attention upon the sinister crimson glory of the comet
ahead. Through those days it had largened swiftly to our eyes, from a
light-point to a small red disk, and then to a larger disk, and finally
to the gigantic circle of crimson-glowing light that loomed before us
now, and toward which I and the three Sub-Chiefs in the cruisers just
behind my own now gazed.

Tremendous as it was, the great comet's light was not dazzling to our
eyes, being a deep crimson, a dusky, lurid red, and gazing forward I
could make out its general features. The spherical coma was what lay
full before us, a gigantic ball of crimson-glowing electrical energy
that I knew, as in all comets, was hollow, holding in the space inside
it the solid matter of the nucleus. Behind it, too, I could glimpse the
vast faint-glowing tail streaming outward behind the onrushing coma.
The light of that tail, I knew, was but faint electrical energy shot
back from the terrific coma and propelling that coma forward through
space like a great rocket streaming fire behind it. The small comets
of our own galaxy, I knew, moved in fixed though irregular orbits
about our stars, and thus would often move about a star or sun in the
opposite direction to that in which their tail was pushing them, simply
because even the impetus of the tail could not make them leave their
fixed orbits. This giant comet of outer space, though, I knew, moved
in no orbit whatever through the empty immensities of the outer void,
and so would always race through space in a direction opposite to that
of its tail, the energy of the mighty coma shot forth in the tail like
the powder of a great rocket, propelling it irresistibly forward with
terrific momentum and force.

The glowing coma seemed countless millions of miles across, the still
vaster tail behind appearing to extend limitlessly backward into the
void. Gazing toward it, with something of awe, I was silent for a time,
then turned to the speech-instrument. "We'll slant our ships up over
the coma," I ordered, "and reconnoiter it for an opening."

Our massed cruisers shot steeply upward at the order, but as they did
so the voice of Jurt Tul came doubtfully from the opening before me.
"You think we can find an opening through which we can penetrate inside
the coma?" he asked.

"We'll have to," I told him. "We've only a few score hours left to get
inside and bring our force-beams to bear on the nucleus."

The Aldebaranian's voice came slowly in answer. "That coma," he said;
"it seems impossible that we can ever get inside it----"

There was silence as I gazed ahead toward the great comet, whose coma
was now indeed a terrific spectacle. An immense lurid sea of crimson
light, it seemed to fill all the universe, shifting slowly downward and
beneath us as our thousand cruisers hummed up at a steep slant over it.
We were racing toward it at a full million miles above its level, the
rim of the huge sphere of crimson light creeping across the black void
beneath us as comet and cruisers rushed closer to each other. Gazing
down toward the great coma, its lurid crimson light drenching all in
the control room, I heard startled exclamations beneath as even the
imperturbable members of my cruiser's cosmopolitan crew were awed by
the comet's magnitude and terror. Then, when the titanic crimson sphere
of the coma seemed squarely beneath our rushing ships, I uttered a word
into the instrument before me, and immediately our cruiser and the
thousand behind it had halted, had turned squarely about, and then at
reduced speed were racing along at the same speed as the comet, hanging
above it and accompanying it on its mad rush through the void toward
our galaxy.

Below us now lay the giant red-glowing globe of the coma, racing on
toward the far swarm of light-points that was our galaxy. And now,
gazing intently down into its far-flung glowing mass, I strained my
eyes for sight of some opening, some crevice in that mighty body of
glowing electrical energy that would permit us to penetrate to the
space inside it. Yet no such opening could be seen, no tiniest break
in the coma's lurid sphere. A single, unbroken and gigantic globe of
crimson luminescence, it hung beneath us, as we rushed through the
void, the vast fan-tail of faintest crimson light streaming out behind.
Through all our days of tense flight outward toward the comet I had
hoped against hope that in its coma would be some break or opening,
however small, that would permit us to penetrate inside, but now my
last hope, and the galaxy's last hope, was shattered by the glowing,
unbroken mass of this gigantic comet's coma. With sinking heart I gazed
down toward it as our triangle of ships sped on above it.

Gor Han's deep voice sounded from the instrument before me. "There
seems no opening in the coma at all, Khel Ken," he said. "And it
is instant annihilation for anything to venture into that coma's
electrical energy!"

"We'll have to drop lower and cruise about the coma's surface," I told
the Betelgeusan. "We _must_ get inside, somehow!"

With the words our cruiser began to sink smoothly downward, still
holding its forward flight above the comet, the massed ships behind
following steadily in our course. Down--down--by thousands of miles
a moment we sank, down until the giant coma beneath seemed the only
thing in all the universe, glowing from horizon to horizon like an
awful aurora of crimson death. An inconceivably colossal sea of lurid
electrical energy, a giant deadly sphere of glowing force which it were
annihilation for anything to touch, it stretched beneath us, broadening
still as we came closer toward it. Down--down----

A cry from Najus Nar sounded beside me. "Those cubes!" the insect-man
was shouting. "Racing ahead of the comet there!"

Swiftly I gazed down toward the foremost rim of the great, onrushing
coma, and saw what he had seen. Racing along a few thousand miles in
front of the comet, separated from each other by great spaces, there
sped score upon score of mighty metal cubes, glinting in the coma's
lurid light! Distant as they were, I could glimpse them clearly through
our telescopic windows, extending in a great chain or line around the
comet's head, and rushing before it through the deeps of space. And
there were openings in the sides of these speeding cubes, transparent
openings from which gushed pure white light! For they were ships!
Colossal cube-ships flashing on with the great comet on its thundering
rush toward our universe!

"Cube-ships!" It was Gor Han's shout that echoed my thought.

"Cube-ships!" Najus Nar too was crying. "Scouting before the comet!"

"And that means that these cube-ships are from the comet's heart!" I
cried excitedly; "from its----"

My exclamation had been cut short by simultaneous sharp cries from Gor
Han and Jurt Tul.

"The cubes have seen us!" they shouted. "They're coming up toward us!"

For there, far below us, the great chain of mighty cube-ships had
suddenly condensed, shortened, and they had all, a hundred or more in
number, massed swiftly together as though in answer to some sudden
alarm and were driving up toward us! At velocity incredible they shot
up toward us, while we gazed stunned; then as they flashed nearer there
flashed up from the foremost of them a long, slender shaft of crimson
light like that of the comet below, a terrific bolt of electrical
energy like that of the coma beneath, which struck one of our cruisers
squarely and instantly annihilated it. And as we gazed stupefied toward
it in that dazing moment, from the upleaping cubes beneath score upon
score of other crimson deadly bolts were stabbing up toward us!




                                   2


"Battle formation!"

Even as the deadly crimson bolts had shot up from the cubes toward us
I had yelled the order into the instrument before me, and it was all
that saved us from disaster in that moment, since in the split-second
before the glowing bolts could reach us our cruisers had shifted
their formation suddenly, only a score of them being struck by those
glowing shafts. In that moment our cruisers had shifted into three long
parallel lines, and then, as the massed cubes beneath flashed ever
upward toward us, their glowing bolts blasting our cruisers, I had
shouted another order into the speech-instrument above the great din
beneath.

"The force-beams!" I cried. "Turn them on these cube-ships--push them
down into the coma!"

There came a deep shout from Gor Han at the order, and from Jurt Tul's
ship there issued through my instrument the amphibian's cool laugh.
The next instant there were shooting downward from all our cruisers
the great force-beams, broad beams, not of light but of darkness, of
utter blackness and absence of light, of great force that was invisible
itself but whose terrific power drove even the light-vibrations from
its path and so made the force-beams seem beams of utter blackness.
Down toward the uprushing cube-ships the black force-beams stabbed,
and as they smote among those cubes those that were struck by them
were driven suddenly downward with inconceivable power. Down, down,
struggling vainly against the irresistible force-beams that pushed
them, down, down until in a moment more those struck had been driven
into the crimson sphere of the mighty coma beneath, vanishing in its
immense lurid sea and there meeting annihilation instantly in spurts of
leaping light!

Thus a full score of the hundred cube-ships below had been forced
down to death in the comet in a single moment, but the rest were
still leaping toward us and before we could loose more of the deadly
force-beams they were just beneath us, among us, their crimson bolts
blasting lightning-like about them, leaping from cube to cruiser. High
above the titanic thundering comet, like flies above a sun, cubes and
cruisers whirled and struck and ran, with crimson bolts and black
force-beams stabbing thick through the void about us. I heard the
shouts of Gor Han and Jurt Tul and Najus Nar from the instrument before
me, screamed my orders into its opening as my own cruiser soared
through the wild mêlée with black beams whirling. I glimpsed one of the
cubes rocketing toward us, looming in an instant to immense size, a
colossal metal cube thousands of feet square, through the transparent
sections of which I could glimpse for a split-second the white-lit
interior, a mass of intricate mechanisms among which clung the beings
who manned it, black, shapeless masses that I but half glimpsed in that
mad moment. Then from the cube's great side a glowing red bolt shot
toward us, but a moment too late, since by then our cruiser had shot
upward and our black force-beam had smote down upon the cube-ship to
drive it into the glowing sea of death below!

About us, too, all our cruisers were speeding upward, in answer to my
orders, and before the cubes could check our maneuver we were over
them, all our dark force-beams smiting from above. Struck by those
beams, all but a scant half-dozen of the remaining cubes drove down
to doom in the coma's fiery sea, before they could rise to our level
to resume the battle. The half-dozen left seemed to hover motionless
a moment, then turned and sped away from us, back over the coma's
crimson-glowing sphere toward the great tail of the comet, streaming
out behind!

"We've beaten them!" Gor Han was bellowing. "They're trying to get
away----"

"After them!" I yelled into the speech-instrument. "They're trying to
get back inside the coma--they must have some way of getting inside!"

But my order had been unnecessary, for even as the half-dozen great
cubes flashed away, our cruisers, still some eight hundred in number,
had turned and were racing after them like unleashed hounds after
their prey. Downward and backward we raced after them, low across
the glowing surface of the great comet, over the deadly coma to where
the faint, vast tail issued from it. Ahead we could see the six
cubes fleeing onward, at a speed equal to our own, and the sight of
them caused us to open to the last notch the power of our throbbing
generators for that wild pursuit. Within moments, at that tremendous
speed, there came into view ahead the rear rim of the coma's colossal
glowing sphere, with the fainter glow that marked the currents of the
great tail streaming back from the rim into the void of space.

Swift as were the great cubes ahead, though, our great cruisers of the
Interstellar Patrol, speediest of all the galaxy's ships, were proving
now to be swifter, since slowly, steadily, we had begun to overhaul
those fleeing shapes. I heard Gor Han's deep voice, excited as always
in battle, from the speech-instruments, heard Jurt Tul's calm comments
as we drove nearer the flying cubes, heard Najus Nar's eager cries.
The cubes were passing out now from over the great coma, on over the
vast tail, to my puzzlement. I had thought they were striving to gain
the interior of the comet, but instead they were racing away from it,
while with every moment we were drawing nearer to them. Then, just when
it seemed that another moment's flight would bring us upon them, they
halted abruptly in space, hovering above the faint, vast-streaming
tail, and then plunged straight down into the mighty currents of the
tail, and were moving back, _inside_ that tail, toward the great coma
behind us!

"The tail!" cried Najus Nar. "They're going up the tail itself and into
the coma's heart!"

But I too had seen and had understood all in that moment, had
understood what I had not dreamed before, that the only opening through
the great coma to the hollow at its heart lay at the coma's rear, and
could be reached only by struggling up to it through the awful currents
of the tail! These mighty cubes, I saw, had been constructed in that
shape especially to resist and endure those terrible, back-sweeping
ether-currents set up by the comet's rush through the void,
terrific currents glowing with the electrical energy shot backward
and dissipated in driving the comet on. The cubes thus specially
constructed could brave those colossal currents where weaker craft
would be battered to fragments. All this I understood and weighed, in
that tense moment, and then had made decision and was shouting back
into the instrument before me.

"Down with our ships, too, then!" I cried. "_We're going up the tail
after them!_"

I heard an exclamation from Gor Han, an answering shout from Najus
Nar, and then my cruiser and all the cruisers behind us were dipping
steeply downward, plunging into the vast and faint-glowing tail! The
next moment was one of blind, utter confusion, for as we plunged into
the terrific currents our cruisers were whirled up and backward as
though by gigantic hands, thrown helplessly like leaves in a terrific
wind, cruiser smashing against cruiser and destroying each other there
by dozens in that wild moment. Then as the pilot beside me clung to
the controls, bringing its bows around to face those mighty currents,
heading toward the coma, our ship steadied, while those about it
steadied likewise. We had lost half a hundred ships in that first
terrific plunge, but neither my own nor those of the three Sub-Chiefs
had been injured, and now we were moving slowly up the great currents
of the tail toward the coma. The tail about us was to the eyes but a
great region of faint light, but far ahead of us there glowed like
a crimson wall of light across the heavens the mighty coma, and
against it we could make out the dark square shapes of the cube-ships
we pursued, likewise fighting their way toward the coma through those
terrific currents.

       *       *       *       *       *

I think now that the moments which followed, as we struggled in pursuit
of those cubes, were almost the most terrible I ever experienced,
moments in which it seemed impossible that our ships could breast such
awful currents and live. About us the currents roared deafeningly,
thrilling through every portion of our ships, sweeping against us with
titanic power. On and on we struggled, veering to take advantage of
weaker currents, blundering into great maelstroms, swaying, plunging,
fighting on, with the coma's glowing wall looming ever closer ahead.
I heard Gor Han's anxious comments from the instrument before me,
glimpsed cruisers here and there behind my own collapsing and sweeping
backward, knew that not for long could we fight against those currents
and live.

The coma was very near, now, a giant wall of crimson light across the
heavens, and now I made out a dark circle within that glowing wall, a
circular opening rapidly largening to our eyes and toward which the
flying cubes ahead were struggling.

"The opening!" Gor Han was shouting, his voice coming to me even above
the awful din of the currents about us.

"Straight toward it after those cubes!" I cried. "Our ships can't stand
this much longer!"

Now ahead I could see the cube-ships we pursued struggling toward
that opening slower and slower, fighting the currents which were most
powerful here where they issued from the mighty coma ahead. A moment
more, though, and they had reached it, and vanished inside, while we
in turn were fighting through the titanic sweep of those currents
toward it. On--on--the currents that raged against us had become
awful in strength, seeming to clutch at us with supreme power at this
last moment. The opening loomed larger ahead, now, a dark circular
passageway remaining miraculously open and unchanged through that
electrical sea whose deadly crimson mass formed its walls. On--on--it
seemed that never could we reach it, so terribly did the currents sweep
about us. Yard by yard, foot by foot, we crept forward toward it, were
on its brink, seemed to hesitate there for an instant before being
swept backward and away, and then with a supreme last effort of our
throbbing generators we crept forward out of the grip of those gigantic
currents and into the open passageway!

Now all about us there raged the glowing electrical sea of the colossal
coma, into the deadly mass of which the passage led, a straight passage
which I knew could only be artificially made and maintained. Far ahead
in that light-walled passage we could glimpse the dark shapes of the
cubes, fleeing still before us, and now with humming generators our
cruisers leapt forward, through that tunnel of the deadly coma! Above,
below, on each side, there raged the coma's electrical sea, which it
were annihilation to touch, and the circular passage down which we fled
was hardly wide enough to admit three of our ships abreast, yet down
it at reckless speed we sped, all thought leaving us now save the wild
excitement of the pursuit.

Crimson light from the hell of glowing death that raged all about
us beat blood-like upon us as we drove on, yet the cries of Gor Han
and Najus Nar and even the cool Jurt Tul mingled with my own from
the speech-instrument, as we shot forward in pursuit of the fleeing
cubes. Never, surely, was pursuit stranger than that one, the galaxy's
hundreds of cruisers, manned by every dissimilar shape to be found
upon its myriad worlds, leaping forward in the narrow opening that
led through a comet's deadly mass into its unglimpsed heart, after
the strange cube-craft that fled on before us. A single slip of the
controls for a fraction of an inch was enough to send any cruiser into
the incandescent walls to death, and indeed I glimpsed cruisers among
those that followed me blundering into those walls in our wild flight
onward and vanishing in wild spurts of light!

Yet on and on we leapt, and shouted now as we saw the cubes ahead
shooting out from the passageway into open space beyond. A moment more
and we were on their tracks, were flashing out too from the encircling
crimson walls of glowing death, that vanished suddenly from about
us as we entered into a vast region of open space, the immense open
space that lay at the giant comet's heart! Far, far away from us there
stretched the walls of the gigantic coma that encompassed this open
space, above and below, enclosing all that space within their deadly
electrical sea. This, though, we had expected and it was not this that
held our attention in that stunning moment. It was the comet's nucleus,
hanging at the center of that space. For that nucleus was a mass of
smoothly revolving worlds!

Worlds! Worlds there at the comet's heart, worlds that were disk-shaped
instead of spherical, a dozen or more of which revolved in a great
ring about a single world that was larger than any of the others, and
that hung motionless! Over those revolving worlds, down toward that
central disk-world the cube-ships ahead of us were fleeing, and as we
shot down after them I saw that it and the rim of other disks, though
not illuminated by the dusky crimson glow of the encompassing comet,
were bathed in light, pure white light that seemed to emanate from
themselves! And as we rushed down toward the surface of that central
world I glimpsed upon it smooth dark ways and streets, on each side
of which were what seemed great, smooth-sided shallow pits; glimpsed
multitudes of dark, shapeless figures that moved to and fro along
those streets and ways, tending great mechanisms set up in masses
here and there along them; glimpsed a single great circular plaza or
smooth-floored clearing set amid those streets and pits and massed
mechanisms, at the center of which loomed a great, truncated dark
pyramid upon whose flat summit rested some big disk-shaped mechanism.
Then in that same flashing glimpse I saw that which drove all else from
my mind, saw from the surface of all this mighty world a tremendous
swarm of great cube-ships that was driving up toward the ships we
pursued, and toward ourselves!

"Cube-ships!" Gor Han was crying. "Cube-ships in thousands, and they're
attacking us!"

"Back!" I cried. "Back up and outward! We have no chance against these
thousands!"

But before our cruisers could turn, before we could halt and slant back
upward, the thousands of leaping cubes from beneath were upon us! Then
about us for a wild moment was conflict indescribable, colossal cubes
rushing by thousands upon our hundreds of gleaming cruisers, crimson
electrical bolts and black force-beams whirling and stabbing in wild
destruction. Cubes thronged thick about us as our cruiser leapt upward,
and then the thrumming of the force-beams of our ship sounded as they
drove paths of instant devastation through the ruck of battle about us.
From the speech-instrument there came above the din of battle a wild
cry from Gor Han, and I saw that a crimson bolt had grazed past his
cruiser's stern, warping its whole side with its terrific power and
sending his craft swirling helplessly down to the world below! I cried
out at that sight, then saw Najus Nar's craft slant downward even as
my own struggled wildly with the cubes about it, saw the insect-man's
cruiser drive right and left with force-beams, as other cubes from
beneath rushed up toward it. Then as it shot downward among them to
reach Gor Han's falling ship it had crashed glancingly along the side
of one of the uprushing cubes, and with its prow a twisted wreck of
metal was whirling down also!

"Gor Han! Najus Nar!" I shouted, as I saw them fall; then a deadly
bolt of blinding crimson fire flashed past our cruiser's walls,
missing us only by inches; I yelled crazily as the cube above that had
loosed it was driven smashingly into the battle whirl about us by our
swift-leaping force-beam. But about us now our cruisers were swiftly
vanishing, as the hordes of cube-ships rushed upon them! They were
stabbing out with black beams to the bitter end, driving cubes down
to death with those beams, yet they were fast disappearing beneath
the withering hail of deadly crimson electrical bolts. But a score of
cruisers remained beside me, now but a dozen, as the crimson bolts
still flashed thick, Jurt Tul's ship fighting side by side with my own.
Then, as but a scant five or six cruisers remained, the target of all
the blasting bolts from the massed cubes about us, there penetrated
through the deafening roar of battle from the speech-instrument Jurt
Tul's great voice.

"Back out of the comet!" he yelled. "It's our only chance, Khel Ken--to
get outside until the rest of the Patrol's cruisers arrive!"

I saw, even through my mad blood-lust at that moment, that he was right
and that our only chance of further action lay in winning clear of the
comet. "Back, then!" I cried.

With the words our half-dozen cruisers zoomed upward and outward at
such tremendous velocity that the deadly bolts from the thousands of
cubes beneath fell short of us in our wild upward rush. Up--up--upward
from that great central world we shot, and outward. The cube-ships
beneath, taken by surprize for the moment, then massed also and leapt
up after us. And now, a scant six cruisers remaining of all the
thousands that had been our force a few minutes before, we raced out
from that central world, toward the darker circle in the distant coma's
wall that was the one passage to outside space. Out over the ring of
revolving disk-worlds we shot, out toward that opening, out----

But what was that? That swarm of tiny, square shapes, of gleaming
little cube-shapes, which even at that distance we could see had darted
suddenly from one side across the dark circle of the single opening?
Close-massed in a compact swarm, they had shot out from the side to
halt _across_ that opening, hanging motionless there. Cube-ships,
hundreds in number, that had flashed toward that opening from one side,
to hang motionless there across it, while behind us there raced after
us in deadly pursuit the other cube-ship thousands! Cube-ships that
hung motionless, ready, across that round opening through the great
coma, and at sight of which I cried aloud once more.

"They've cut us off--they're ahead of us!" I cried. "_They've barred
the one way to outside space and we're trapped here at the comet's
heart!_"




                                   3


The moment that followed, as our ships slowed and hung motionless, with
doom ahead and doom behind, was one in which the death that we had
dared a score of times since reaching the comet loomed full before us.
The cube-ships that barred the way ahead, the thousands racing toward
us from behind--these were like death's great jaws closing upon us,
and for an instant I felt myself surrendering to utter despair. But
then, as my eyes dropped downward, toward the ring of outer smaller
disk-worlds over which we had been flashing and above which we now
hung, a flicker of hope shot through me and I turned swiftly to the
speech-instrument.

"Down to those worlds below!" I cried. "There's a chance that we can
hide on one of them until we can get out of the comet!"

Instantly, spurred to greater swiftness by our desperate situation,
our half-dozen cruisers were slanting sharply down toward one of those
revolving disk-worlds. The surface of that world leapt up with terrific
speed toward us as we shot recklessly downward, and I sighted cities
of pits and streets and mechanisms like that of the central world upon
it, cities though that did not cover all its surface as in the central
world, but were scattered about it, the rest of the disk-world's
surface being a tumbled mass of mighty mountains and chasmed valleys,
all of barren dark rock. It was down toward one of these tremendous
chasms, near the disk-world's outer edge, that we were heading, every
feature of that world's surface lying plain beneath us in the strange
white light that bathed all these revolving worlds. Downward into that
awful chasm our cruisers shot, and as they did so I glimpsed, high
above, a swarm of tiny dark cube-shapes that had halted their pursuit
of us, were circling about and dropping lower as though to discover our
whereabouts!

Our lives depended on finding some place of hiding in this
tremendous-walled chasm, I knew, and as we arrowed down into its
depths, white-lit by the same strange illumination, I gazed swiftly
about for some place of concealment. A moment the search seemed
hopeless, there being nothing but the chasm's narrow floor of barren
rock, its towering jagged rock sides, and then as we shot along its
length I sighted a great crack or crevice in one of them, a long,
crack-like opening that was large enough to admit our cruisers, and
behind which could be glimpsed the dark depths of some great cavernous
hollow in the rock.

"Through that crack!" I ordered swiftly, saw Jurt Tul's cruiser move
quickly toward it, scraping against the crack's jagged edges as it
pushed through into the dark cavern behind. Another of our cruisers
followed, and then the rest, one by one, until my own was scraping
inside, just as I saw the cube-ships high above dropping toward us,
splitting into divisions of a dozen ships each which were slanting down
over all the surface of this world in search of us, one of them heading
straight toward the great chasm!

As it slanted down toward us I gazed about me, saw that our six
cruisers were hanging in a dark, cavernous abyss that seemed to extend
far down into the depths of this disk-world. A rocky shelf just inside
the crack-opening, though, seemed large enough for us to rest our
ships upon; so instantly we brought them to rest there, cutting off
the generators whose humming might betray us. Then, as our space-doors
opened with a slight inward hiss from the higher-pressure air of the
disk's atmosphere, I stepped quickly out, found Jurt Tul and the other
cruiser captains beside me, and then we had all suddenly crouched down
inside the great crack's edge as a score of the great cube-ships shot
down into the white-lit chasm outside.

Peering out from the cavern's dark depths we saw those cubes hanging
there, then moving slowly along the chasm's length as though in
search of us. Down its length they disappeared and we breathed
easier for a moment; then they reappeared, coming to rest on the
chasm's floor directly beneath the opening in which we crouched,
scarce a half-hundred feet below us. Tensely we watched, saw that
doors were opening in those cubes' sides, creatures emerging, the
comet-creatures of these strange worlds. And at sight of those
creatures even our tense situation could not suppress our gasps. For
they were--liquid-creatures! Creatures whose bodies were liquid instead
of solid, creatures that were each but a pool of thick black liquid,
flowing viscously about, in each of which pools floated two round,
white blank disks, great white pupilless eyes.

We saw them flowing forth from out their cubes, saw some whose viscous
bodies held what seemed tools or weapons, saw the floating eyes turned
this way and that about the chasm, as though in search of us. Then a
score of the strange creatures did an incomprehensible thing: they
flowed together into a single liquid mass, a great black pool in which
floated all their eyes, their liquid bodies mingling together! A moment
they remained thus, then had separated, each from the others, and were
returning to their cubes.

"Conversing!" whispered Jurt Tul beside me. "It's their method of
conversing, of exchanging thoughts--to mingle their liquid bodies one
with another!"

I knew the amphibian was right, and shuddered involuntarily at the
thing we had seen. The cubes' doors had closed now, and the cubes were
lifting upward from the chasm's floor. One, more suspicious apparently
than the rest, hovered a moment outside the crack within which we
crouched, and we shrank back, suddenly tense, but after a moment's
inspection it too had driven up after the others, which passed from
sight high above, searching slowly across the disk-world's surface in a
strange formation as though following some discussed plan. We breathed
easier, then, standing erect, and I turned quickly to Jurt Tul.

"Our only chance is to get out of the comet and wait for the five
thousand Patrol cruisers that were to come after us," I told him. "But
we can't leave the comet with Gor Han and Najus Nar prisoned in it!"

The great amphibian shook his head. "We could venture back to the
comet-city on the central world to attempt to find them," he said, "but
in this brilliant white light we'd be seen and destroyed at once."

I was silent, for I knew that it was so, and broodingly I considered
that light, whose white illumination filled all the great chasm
outside, beating faintly even into the cavern, yet seeming to have no
visible source whatever. And then, even as I gazed upon it, that light
died! It seemed to gray, to darken, and then had vanished altogether,
within a moment, while at the same moment there beat faintly through
the air from far away a great clanging note like that of a giant gong.
The chasm outside, the world and worlds about us, lay now in dusk,
their only illumination the lurid, dark crimson light of the comet's
glowing coma, a red disk that gave to the barren rocky world about us
an inconceivably weird appearance.

"That gong!" Jurt Tul was saying. "You heard it? It sounded when the
light died--it means that these comet-creatures maintain and regulate
their own day and night!"

"That white light," I said; "you mean that it's made by them, turned
off for their night?"

He nodded quickly. "It must be. They can use the coma's great
electrical energy to produce that light at will, just as they use that
energy for their crimson bolts. They must turn it off and on at regular
intervals, to produce their day and night, their activity-periods and
rest-periods."

"But then we can venture back to the comet-city--back to the central
world for Gor Han and Najus Nar!" I exclaimed, and he nodded.

"Yes, but we'd best wait longer, since now the cube-ships' search will
be going on, even in this dusk, and we'd have small chance of escaping
them."